Answer-1

         Different types of data sources used in ETL
1.Databases (Structured Data Sources)
These are the most common sources in ETL.

a) Relational Databases (RDBMS)
Store data in tables (rows & columns).
Support SQL queries.
Examples: MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, SQL Server

b) NoSQL Databases
Store unstructured or semi‑structured data.
Flexible schema.
Examples: MongoDB (documents), Cassandra (wide‑column), Redis (key‑value)

2. Flat Files (Semi‑structured or Structured)
These are simple files stored on local systems or cloud storage.

a) CSV Files
Comma‑separated values
Easy to extract and widely used
Example: Sales data stored in sales_2024.csv

b) Excel Files (XLS/XLSX)
Multiple sheets, formatting
Example: Monthly HR attendance report in Excel

c) Text Files (TXT)
Logs, simple text data
Example: Server log files	

3. APIs (Application Programming Interfaces)
Used for real‑time or on‑demand data extraction.
Provide data in JSON or XML format
Examples:Weather API for live temperature
Stock Market API for real‑time prices

4. Cloud Storage Services
Modern ETL pipelines often pull data from cloud platforms.
Examples: AWS S3, Google Cloud Storage, Azure Blob Storage

5. Web Data Sources
Used when data is available on websites. 
a) Web Scraping
Extracting data from HTML pages
Example: Scraping product prices from an e‑commerce site

b) Web Feeds
RSS/Atom feeds
Example: News feed extraction

Answer-2
Data extraction is the process of retrieving raw data from various sources such as databases, 
files, APIs, and cloud storage. It is the first and most important step of the ETL pipeline.
 Extraction gathers data from multiple systems, moves it to a staging area, and prepares it for transformation. 
 It ensures that data is collected in a consistent format, supports full and incremental loads, 
 and maintains data quality so that the transformation and loading steps can run smoothly.

Answer-3

*CSV (Comma‑Separated Values)
Plain text file
Only raw data — no colors, formulas, or formatting
Very fast to extract
Best for large datasets
Works smoothly with all ETL tools
Example: sales.csv used for loading into a data warehouse.

*Excel (XLS/XLSX)
Spreadsheet file
Supports formulas, charts, formatting, multiple sheets
Extraction is slower and needs special connectors
Suitable for small or manually prepared data
Example: attendance.xlsx shared by HR for monthly reports.

Answer-4

1.Connect to the Database
.Use a connection string (server name, database name, username, password).
.Tools like SQL Server Management Studio, Python, or ETL tools create this connection.

2.Write the SQL Query
.Use SQL commands to select the required data.
Example:SELECT * FROM customers WHERE city = 'Delhi';

3.Execute the Query
.Run the SQL query to fetch the data.
.The database returns the result set.

4.Fetch and Retrieve the Data
.The ETL tool or script collects the returned rows.
.Data is temporarily stored in memory or a staging area.

5️.Export or Load the Extracted Data
Save the extracted data into:
.CSV files
.Data warehouse tables
.Staging databases

Answer-5
1. Inconsistent or Poor‑Quality Data
Data may contain missing values, duplicates, wrong formats, or errors.
Different sources may store the same field in different formats (e.g., date formats).
This makes extraction difficult and increases cleaning time.

2. Multiple Data Formats & Sources
Data comes from databases, CSV files, Excel, APIs, logs, and cloud storage.
Each source has its own structure and connection method.
ETL tools must handle all formats correctly, which increases complexity.

3. Large Data Volume & Performance Issues
Extracting huge datasets (GBs or TBs) can be slow.
It may overload the source system or cause timeouts.
Requires optimized queries, indexing, and incremental extraction.

Answer-6
APIs are interfaces that allow two systems to communicate and exchange data. 
They help in real‑time data extraction by providing instant, live data in formats like JSON or XML.
APIs eliminate the need for manual file downloads and allow ETL tools to automatically fetch updated 
information at regular intervals.
 
Answer-7
Databases are preferred for enterprise‑level data extraction because they provide accurate and consistent data,
handle large volumes efficiently, offer strong security, support complex SQL queries, 
and integrate easily with ETL tools for automated and scheduled extraction.

Answer-8
 *Steps for Extracting Data from Large CSV Files (1GB+)
1️.Use Chunking Instead of Loading Entire File
.Load the file in small chunks (e.g., 10,000 or 50,000 rows at a time).
.Prevents memory overload and speeds up processing.

2️.Optimize File Reading
.Use efficient libraries/tools like:
.Python pandas.read_csv() with chunksize
.Apache Spark
.AWS Glue
.Disable unnecessary features (like type inference) to improve speed.

3.Validate Data While Reading
.Check for missing values, incorrect formats, or corrupted rows.
.Helps avoid errors during transformation.

4️.Use Compression When Possible
.Work with compressed formats like .gz or .zip.
.Reduces disk usage and speeds up reading.

5️.Move Data to a Staging Area
.Store chunks temporarily in a staging database or cloud storage.
.Makes transformation easier and more organized.

6.Perform Incremental Extraction
.Extract only new or updated data instead of the whole file.
.Saves time and reduces load on the system.
 
 

